The challenge of reconciliation · 359
what it means to me, as an intergenerational Survivor. People who I love and admire were wronged, humiliated, and forgotten, and unjustly imprisoned by the country I ... call home.... [The part of the Japanese redress program that worked best] was the investment in communities and culture ... [and the establishment of ] the Canadian Race Relations Foundation ... to ensure that this never happened again.... Only when "you" and "me" become "us" and "we" can there be any reconciliation.293
Caroline Wong said that as an intergenerational Survivor of the Chinese head tax, which her grandfathers had to pay when they entered Canada from China,
I grew up rejecting the stereotypical [identity] of the Chinese person because I wanted to be as `white' as possible.... In terms of reconciliation, my grandmother is a warrior ... she's been fighting for head tax redress. In 2006, the federal government offered an apology and compensation for head tax survivors and their spouses, but very few were still living. It was a huge slap in the face for many Survivors like my grandmother and other first-generation Chinese Canadians who suffered the impacts of discrimination.... What is the price you can put on loss of life, loss of land, loss of family, and discrimination and abuse. You can't put a price on these things.... Compensation is only part of the answer.... Reconciliation is not just an apology but a two-way path of apology and forgiveness.... Education ... exposing the truth of what happened and making sure it's never forgotten.... Reconciliation starts with youth and building intercultural understanding...I hope this is the start of many other intercultural dialogues.... We need to understand about residential schools and also what other cultural groups have experienced. I challenge all of you to ask, "What does it mean to be Canadian?" Or, if you're from another place, "What is your role in this community?"294
Danny Richmond, an intergenerational Holocaust Survivor, said,
My grandmother and grandfather lived through things in their twenties that I can't even begin to imagine ... for my people, this history is still an open wound ... what can I tell you that will give you understanding of this? ... It's always been part of my life.... Because the Holocaust was at such a widespread global level ... who is the perpetrator? Every day, people were implicated ... and there were systems and nations involved ... so there's no one person I can accept an apology from. The German government has apologized. It's about the reconciliation of trust in humanity that this kind of persecution won't happen again to the Jews or globally.... Reconciliation is about making sure that none of our communities suffer that persecution again ... for me it's about guarding our institutions to make sure they aren't continuing this kind of persecution ... we've had the apology from the government but how are we checking in to see how we're doing today? ... We need to create a National Day of Reconciliation that deals with these past human rights abuses, and educates [people] about what [what happens when we] dehumanize people. Canada was a safe haven for my family but it's also a nation with a lot of

